---
title: "What goes on inside toddlers' brains? A pioneering project is trying to find out"
description: "What goes on inside toddlers' brains? A pioneering project is trying to find out."
tags: ["news"]
date: 2024-01-22
image: "/images/6.webp"
slug: "what-goes-on-inside-toddlers-brains-a-pioneering-project-is-trying-to-find-out"
locale: "en"
---

Two-year-old Henry is completely transfixed by the iPad in front of him. Every time a smiley face appears he taps the screen - and his tap transforms the face into a cartoon of a dancing animal.

It looks like a simple, repetitive game, but is actually a test of a fundamental skill that is developing in the toddler's growing brain. Henry is wearing a sensor-laden cap with wires emerging from it that are attached to a large piece of analytical machinery. While Henry plays the game, the cap is scanning his brain activity and building up a picture of how well he can control his decision making.

It is a test of inhibitory control, one of the skills scientists at the University of Bristol are measuring in babies and toddlers, as part of a mission to understand how and when very young children develop abilities that enable them to focus and learn.

Scientists already know these skills are critical - but they don't yet know at what point they are established in an infant brain.

The development of hundreds of children - from the age of six months to five years - is being tracked as they form the key skills that will shape their academic and social abilities.

But what is really special about this pioneering project is that it is a human experiment within another decades-long human experiment. The mothers of 300 of the children being studied are themselves part of a project that has monitored their health since they too were babies, in the 1990s.

